# ptnstrerrpredict - Determining an Energy Cost Function to Predict 3D Protein Structure using Machine Learning

## Program

This project is a part of my undergraduate curriculum at Drexel University in Philadelphia, PA. During the summer after my freshman year, I was selected as a STAR (Students Tackling Advanced Research) Scholar Research Assistant under Drexel University Office of Undergraduate Research. 

The STAR Scholars Program is a competitive research program that allows first-year students to participate in faculty-mentored research, scholarship, or creative work during the summer after their freshman year. The program provides an opportunity for students to get to know faculty, explore a major area of research, and gain practical skills and valuable research experience. It is designed to bring the brightest and most forward-thinking minds at Drexel together to independently develop novel research and creative ideas.

## Background

Over the course of my STAR experience, I will be focusing on the protein folding problem, which is a long-standing research topic in bioinformatics. In short, the nature of the problem is being able to predict the three-dimensional (3-D) structure of a protein given it primary amino acid sequence. Many methods have been employed to directly build, or fold, the 3-D structure of a protein based on its sequence. In my project, however, I will simply be creating a model to predict how much one proposed 3-D structure deviates from the protein’s most optimal structure. Using an energy cost function, along with selected factors, or features, of protein structure and primary sequence data, I plan to research and build a cost function that will be used to predict magnitude of this deviation. 

In the field of molecular biology, specifically in proteomics (the study of proteins), the “structure dictates function” paradigm generalizes that molecules with distinct structural features often have specific function in cells. Thus, the obvious application to this bioinformatics project is predicting protein structure and function based on the primary sequences of novel proteins. This generalized application can have far-reaching implications for the field of molecular biology and for big pharma—the creation of novel proteins with known structure and function can allow for specific disease treatment solutions and for specific genetically engineering novel biological pathways. Such advancements can be observed in international research competitions such as the International Genetically Engineered Machine Foundation. Research in this area is more concerned with the classification of proteins based on primary structure. Such a task is more difficult when the way in which a structure is built, or the characteristic of a specific protein function, is more or less unknown. 

## Project Design

In general, the project can be segmented into four main objectives. 

The first objective is to design a decoy set of proteins to use in a training set when first initializing the model. This set will contain protein sequences and a representative score value that represents the degree by which their less optimal structure deviates from their most optimal structure. Over the course of this first objective, only the protein structures will be generated and not their scores. The structures will most likely be from pre-generated protein structures with slight modifications to them. Included in this objective is also the selection of normal protein structures. Specifically, by mid-term the data set should encompass about ten decoy proteins and ten normal proteins. As the term progresses, the model will predict on a much greater number of both types of protein structures. This objective will be met once there are an appropriate number of protein structures generated.

The second objective is to define a metric for the predicted error value. Software known as Rosetta (or the PyRosetta library in Python) includes different metrics to measure this error: two of which are root mean standard deviation (RMSD) and the difference in dihedral angles. RSMD has a tendency to overstate error for normal variation in structure and dihedral angle measurements do not take into account long range dependencies in a protein’s structure. A protein’s error value, or energy score, should be representative of the degree by which it varies from its ideal structure. Therefore, one possible error measurement is to look at the difference in All-Pairs-Distance matrices. Clearly, for each of the decoy proteins generated in the previous set, their respective error value needs to be generated, which requires knowing their optimal 3-D structure. Once the metric is defined and applied to the structures from objective one, error values can be matched with their respective structures and incorporated into the decoy set of proteins. The same will be done for the normal proteins. This objective will be met when all error values are generated for the dataset generated in objective one and it is determined to be representative of the optimal 3-D structure deviation. It should be noted that most of the data will be analyzed in Python with the possibility of a few experimental exceptions which will be done in MATLAB.

The third objective is to carry out feature extraction on the structures. Each feature in the extracted feature set should independently predict aspects about the structure. In short, the feature set will have different values for each structure, allowing the proposed model to learn and eventually predict the error values defined in objective two. These features will correspond to each residue, or window of residues, in the primary structure of the protein. It may be advantageous to include both individual residue-based features in addition to frame-based features in the feature set. If frame-based features are determined to improve prediction of each structure’s error value, experiments will need to be run in order to determine the most optimal frame size for the residues. A few possible residue-based features include consecutive dihedral angles in a vector space, the distance to the nearest atom, and the number of nearest atoms within a threshold, such as three angstroms (A ̇). Depending on the choice of features, different networks may prove to be more appropriate for the research. For instance, a 3D convolution neural network (CNN) would be most appropriate for 3D atom coordinate data due to the ability of 3D CNN to recognize 3D spatial interactions. This objective will be met once an appropriate number of features are extracted and applied to the aforementioned dataset.

The fourth objective is to design a neural network that will predict the energy scores defined in objective two with the feature set extracted in objective three. This network will most likely either be a three-layer feedforward neural network or CNN. Although both techniques require a large number of samples, the latter has more features and requires more samples to optimize these features. The former requires little data for accurate results, whereas the latter requires a lot more. A model will be selected depending on how much data is generated. Regardless, both models will be run once this fourth objective is finished and then the better method will be optimized on a much larger data set than originally built. Ideally, a pipeline that generates protein structure data should be built early on so that further data curation can be done automatically and more quickly in preparation for the optimization and testing in this objective. This objective will be met once an accurate predictive model is built and tested over a larger range of different proteins.
